Beginning_SQL/BeginningSQL.md, before:

#Workshop: Beginning SQL

This workshop will teach the basics of working with and querying structured data in a database environment. This workshop uses the SQLite plugin for Firefox. We will provide laptops with the correct software for the workshop. If you bring your own machine to the workshop, you must have the software installed in advance. 

##Software Installation
_If you are using one of the Library's laptops, skip this section._

1. Install Firefox. You can download the software from https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/
2. Install the SQLite Manager add on: **Menu (the three horizontal lines near the
top right corner of Firefox) -> Add-ons -> Search -> SQLite
Manager -> Install -> Restart now**
4. Add SQLite Manager to the menu: **Menu -> Customize, then drag the SQLite
   Manager icon to one of the empty menu squares on the right, Exit Customize**
3. Download the [Portal Database](http://files.figshare.com/1919743/portal_mammals.sqlite)
5. Open SQLite Manager: **Menu -> SQLite Manager**


Relational databases
--------------------

* Relational databases store data in tables with fields (columns) and records
  (rows)
* The data is not in any particular order
* Data in tables has types and all values in a field have
  the same type ([list of data types](#datatypes))
* Every row-column combination contains a single *atomic* value, i.e., not
   containing parts we might want to work with separately.
* Information is not redundant.
* Data is split into multiple tables, each containing one class of information. Tables are related by shared columns of information.
* Queries let us look up data or make calculations based on columns


Why use relational databases
----------------------------

* Data separate from analysis.
  * No risk of accidentally changing data when analyzing it
  * If we change the data we can just rerun the query
* Fast for large amounts of data
* Improve quality control of data entry (type constraints and use of forms in
  Access, Filemaker, etc.)
* The concepts of relational database querying are core to understanding how to
  do similar things in R and Python


Database Management Systems
---------------------------

There are a number of different database management systems for working with
relational data. We're going to use SQLite today, but basically everything we
teach you will apply to the other database systems as well (e.g., MySQL,
PostgreSQL, MS Access, Filemaker Pro). The only things that will differ are the
details of exactly how to import and export data and the
[details of data types](#datatypediffs).


Dataset Description
-------------------

The data we will be using is a time-series for a small mammal community in
southern Arizona. This is part of a project studying the effects of rodents and
ants on the plant community that has been running for almost 40 years.  The
rodents are sampled on a series of 24 plots, with different experimental
manipulations controlling which rodents are allowed to access which plots.

This is a real dataset that has been used in over 100 publications. We've
simplified it just a little bit for the workshop, but you can download the
[full dataset](http://esapubs.org/archive/ecol/E090/118/) and work with it using
exactly the same tools we'll learn about today.


Database Design
---------------

1. Every row-column combination contains a single *atomic* value, i.e., not
   containing parts we might want to work with separately.
2. One field per type of information
3. No redundant information
     * Split into separate tables with one table per class of information
	   * Needs an identifier in common between tables – shared column - to
       reconnect (foreign key).


Introduction to SQLite Manager
------------------------------

Let's all open the database we downloaded in SQLite Manager by clicking on the
open file icon.

You can see the tables in the database by looking at the left hand side of the
screen under Tables.

To see the contents of a table, click on that table and then click on the Browse
and search tab in the right hand section of the screen.

If we want to write a query, we click on the Execute SQL tab.

Import
------

1. Start a New Database **Database -> New Database**
2. Start the import **Database -> Import**
3. Select the file to import
4. Give the table a name (or use the default)
5. If the first row has column headings, check the appropriate box
6. Make sure the delimiter and quotation options are correct
7. Press **OK**
8. When asked if you want to modify the table, click **OK**
9. Set the data types for each field

***EXERCISE: Import the plots and species tables***

You can also use this same approach to append new data to an existing table.


Basic queries
-------------
Let's start by using the **surveys** table.
Here we have data on every individual that was captured at the site,
including when they were captured, what plot they were captured on,
their species ID, sex and weight in grams.

Let’s write an SQL query that selects only the year column from the surveys
table.

    SELECT year FROM surveys;

We have capitalized the words SELECT and FROM because they are SQL keywords.
SQL is case insensitive, but it helps for readability – good style.

If we want more information, we can just add a new column to the list of fields,
right after SELECT:

    SELECT year, month, day FROM surveys;

Or we can select all of the columns in a table using the wildcard *

    SELECT * FROM surveys;

### Unique values

If we want only the unique values so that we can quickly see what species have
been sampled we use ``DISTINCT``

    SELECT DISTINCT species FROM surveys;

If we select more than one column, then the distinct pairs of values are
returned

    SELECT DISTINCT year, species_id FROM surveys;

### Calculated values

We can also do calculations with the values in a query.
For example, if we wanted to look at the mass of each individual
on different dates, but we needed it in kg instead of g we would use

    SELECT year, month, day, weight/1000.0 from surveys;

When we run the query, the expression `weight / 1000.0` is evaluated for each row
and appended to that row, in a new column. Note that because weight is an integer, if we divide by the integer 1000, the results will be reported as integers. In order to get more significant digits, you need to include the decimal point so that SQL knows you want the results reported as floating point numbers. 

Expressions can use any fields, any
arithmetic operators (+ - * /) and a variety of built-in functions (). For
example, we could round the values to make them easier to read.

    SELECT plot, species_ID, sex, weight, ROUND(weight / 1000.0, 2) FROM surveys;

***EXERCISE: Write a query that returns
             The year, month, day, speciesID and weight in mg***

Filtering
---------

Databases can also filter data – selecting only the data meeting certain
criteria.  For example, let’s say we only want data for the species Dipodomys
merriami, which has a species code of DM.  We need to add a WHERE clause to our
query:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE species_id="DM";

We can do the same thing with numbers.
Here, we only want the data since 2000:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE year >= 2000;

We can use more sophisticated conditions by combining tests with AND and OR.
For example, suppose we want the data on Dipodomys merriami starting in the year
2000:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE (year >= 2000) AND (species_id = "DM");

Note that the parentheses aren’t needed, but again, they help with readability.
They also ensure that the computer combines AND and OR in the way that we
intend.

If we wanted to get data for any of the Dipodomys species,
which have species codes DM, DO, and DS we could combine the tests using OR:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE (species_id = "DM") OR (species_id = "DO") OR (species_id = "DS");

***EXERCISE: Write a query that returns
   the day, month, year, species ID, and weight (in kg) for
   individuals caught on Plot 1 that weigh more than 75 g***


Saving & Exporting queries
--------------------------

* Exporting:  **Actions** button and choosing **Save Result to File**.
* Save: **View** drop down and **Create View**


Building more complex queries
-----------------------------

Now, lets combine the above queries to get data for the 3 Dipodomys species from
the year 2000 on.  This time, let’s use IN as one way to make the query easier
to understand.  It is equivalent to saying `WHERE (species_id = "DM") OR (species_id
= "DO") OR (species_id = "DS")`, but reads more neatly:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE (year >= 2000) AND (species_id IN ("DM", "DO", "DS"));

    SELECT *
    FROM surveys
    WHERE (year >= 2000) AND (species_id IN ("DM", "DO", "DS"));

We started with something simple, then added more clauses one by one, testing
their effects as we went along.  For complex queries, this is a good strategy,
to make sure you are getting what you want.  Sometimes it might help to take a
subset of the data that you can easily see in a temporary database to practice
your queries on before working on a larger or more complicated database.


Sorting
-------

We can also sort the results of our queries by using ORDER BY.
For simplicity, let’s go back to the species table and alphabetize it by taxa.

    SELECT * FROM species ORDER BY taxa ASC;

The keyword ASC tells us to order it in Ascending order.
We could alternately use DESC to get descending order.

    SELECT * FROM species ORDER BY taxa DESC;

ASC is the default.

We can also sort on several fields at once.
To truly be alphabetical, we might want to order by genus then species.

    SELECT * FROM species ORDER BY genus ASC, species ASC;

***Exercise: Write a query that returns
             year, species, and weight in kg from the surveys table, sorted with
             the largest weights at the top***


Order of execution
------------------

Another note for ordering. We don’t actually have to display a column to sort by
it.  For example, let’s say we want to order by the species ID, but we only want
to see genus and species.

    SELECT genus, species FROM species ORDER BY taxa ASC;

We can do this because sorting occurs earlier in the computational pipeline than
field selection.

The computer is basically doing this:

1. Filtering rows according to WHERE
2. Sorting results according to ORDER BY
3. Displaying requested columns or expressions.


Order of clauses
----------------
The order of the clauses when we write a query is dictated by SQL: SELECT, FROM, WHERE, ORDER BY
and we often write each of them on their own line for readability.


***Exercise: Let's try to combine what we've learned so far in a single query.
Using the surveys table write a query to display the three date
fields, species ID, and weight in kilograms (rounded to two decimal places), for
rodents captured in 1999, ordered alphabetically by the species ID.***



**BREAK**

Aggregation
-----------

Aggregation allows us to combine results by grouping records based on value and
calculating combined values in groups.

Let’s go to the surveys table and find out how many individuals there are.
Using the wildcard simply counts the number of records (rows)

    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM surveys;

We can also find out how much all of those individuals weigh.

    SELECT COUNT(*), SUM(weight) FROM surveys;

***Do you think you could output this value in kilograms, rounded to 3 decimal
   places?***

    SELECT ROUND(SUM(weight)/1000.0, 3) FROM surveys;

There are many other aggregate functions included in SQL including
MAX, MIN, and AVG.

***From the surveys table, can we use one query to output the total weight,
   average weight, and the min and max weights? How about the range of weight?***

Now, let's see how many individuals were counted in each species. We do this
using a GROUP BY clause

    SELECT species_id, COUNT(*)
    FROM surveys
    GROUP BY species_id;

GROUP BY tells SQL what field or fields we want to use to aggregate the data.
If we want to group by multiple fields, we give GROUP BY a comma separated list.

***EXERCISE: Write queries that return: 1. How many individuals were counted in
   each year. 2. Average weight of each species in each year***

We can order the results of our aggregation by a specific column, including the
aggregated column.  Let’s count the number of individuals of each species
captured, ordered by the count

    SELECT species_id, COUNT(*)
    FROM surveys
    GROUP BY species_id
    ORDER BY COUNT(species_id);


Joins
-----

To combine data from two tables we use the SQL JOIN command, which comes after
the FROM command.

We also need to tell the computer which columns provide the link between the two
tables using the word ON.  What we want is to join the data with the same
species codes.

    SELECT *
    FROM surveys
    JOIN species ON surveys.species_id = species.species_id;

ON is like WHERE, it filters things out according to a test condition.  We use
the table.colname format to tell the manager what column in which table we are
referring to.

We often won't want all of the fields from both tables, so anywhere we would
have used a field name in a non-join query, we can use *table.colname*

For example, what if we wanted information on when individuals of each
species were captured, but instead of their species ID we wanted their
actual species names.

    SELECT surveys.year, surveys.month, surveys.day, species.genus, species.species
    FROM surveys
    JOIN species ON surveys.species_id = species.species_id;

***Exercise: Write a query that returns the genus, the species, and the weight
   of every individual captured at the site***

Joins can be combined with sorting, filtering, and aggregation.  So, if we
wanted average mass of the individuals on each different type of treatment, we
could do something like

    SELECT plots.plot_type, AVG(surveys.wgt)
    FROM surveys
    JOIN plots
    ON surveys.plot = plots.plot_id
    GROUP BY plots.plot_type;


Adding data to existing tables
------------------------------

* Browse & Search -> Add
* Enter data into a csv file and append


Other database management systems
---------------------------------

* Access or Filemaker Pro
    * GUI
    * Forms w/QAQC
	* But not cross-platform
* MySQL/PostgreSQL
    * Multiple simultaneous users
	* More difficult to setup and maintain


Q & A on Database Design (review if time)
-----------------------------------------

1. Order doesn't matter
2. Every row-column combination contains a single *atomic* value, i.e., not
   containing parts we might want to work with separately.
3. One field per type of information
4. No redundant information
     * Split into separate tables with one table per class of information
	 * Needs an identifier in common between tables – shared column - to
       reconnect (foreign key).


<a name="datatypes"></a> Data types
-----------------------------------

| Data type  | Description |
| :------------- | :------------- |
| CHARACTER(n)  | Character string. Fixed-length n  |
| VARCHAR(n) or CHARACTER VARYING(n) |	Character string. Variable length. Maximum length n |
| BINARY(n) |	Binary string. Fixed-length n |
| BOOLEAN	| Stores TRUE or FALSE values |
| VARBINARY(n) or BINARY VARYING(n) |	Binary string. Variable length. Maximum length n |
| INTEGER(p) |	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| SMALLINT | 	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| INTEGER |	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| BIGINT |	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| DECIMAL(p,s) |	Exact numerical, precision p, scale s. |
| NUMERIC(p,s) |	Exact numerical, precision p, scale s. (Same as DECIMAL) |
| FLOAT(p) |	Approximate numerical, mantissa precision p. A floating number in base 10 exponential notation. |
| REAL |	Approximate numerical |
| FLOAT |	Approximate numerical |
| DOUBLE PRECISION |	Approximate numerical |
| DATE |	Stores year, month, and day values |
| TIME |	Stores hour, minute, and second values |
| TIMESTAMP |	Stores year, month, day, hour, minute, and second values |
| INTERVAL |	Composed of a number of integer fields, representing a period of time, depending on the type of interval |
| ARRAY |	A set-length and ordered collection of elements |
| MULTISET | 	A variable-length and unordered collection of elements |
| XML |	Stores XML data |


<a name="datatypediffs"></a> SQL Data Type Quick Reference
----------------------------------------------------------

Different databases offer different choices for the data type definition.

The following table shows some of the common names of data types between the various database platforms:

| Data type |	Access |	SQLServer |	Oracle | MySQL | PostgreSQL |
| :------------- | :------------- | :---------------- | :----------------| :----------------| :---------------|
| boolean	| Yes/No |	Bit |	Byte |	N/A	| Boolean |
| integer	| Number (integer) | Int |	Number | Int / Integer	| Int / Integer |
| float	| Number (single)	|Float / Real |	Number |	Float |	Numeric
| currency | Currency |	Money |	N/A |	N/A	| Money |
| string (fixed) | N/A | Char |	Char | Char |	Char |
| string (variable)	| Text (<256) / Memo (65k+)	| Varchar |	Varchar / Varchar2 |	Varchar |	Varchar |
| binary object	OLE Object Memo	Binary (fixed up to 8K) | Varbinary (<8K) | Image (<2GB)	Long | Raw	Blob | Text	Binary | Varbinary |

Commit message:

added link to cheat sheet

Beginning_SQL/BeginningSQL.md, after:

#Workshop: Beginning SQL

This workshop will teach the basics of working with and querying structured data in a database environment. This workshop uses the SQLite plugin for Firefox. We will provide laptops with the correct software for the workshop. If you bring your own machine to the workshop, you must have the software installed in advance. 

##Software Installation
```
If you are using one of the Library's laptops, skip this section.
```

1. [Download Firefox] (https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/) and install it.
2. Download and install the SQLite Manager add on: **Menu (the three horizontal lines near the
top right corner of Firefox) -> Add-ons -> Search -> SQLite
Manager -> Install -> Restart now**
4. Add SQLite Manager to the menu: **Menu -> Customize, then drag the SQLite
   Manager icon to one of the empty menu squares on the right, Exit Customize**
3. Download the [Portal Database](http://files.figshare.com/1919743/portal_mammals.sqlite)
5. Open SQLite Manager: **Menu -> SQLite Manager**


Relational databases
--------------------

* Relational databases store data in tables with fields (columns) and records
  (rows)
* The data is not in any particular order
* Data in tables has types and all values in a field have
  the same type ([list of data types](#datatypes))
* Every row-column combination contains a single *atomic* value, i.e., not
   containing parts we might want to work with separately.
* Information is not redundant.
* Data is split into multiple tables, each containing one class of information. Tables are related by shared columns of information.
* Queries let us look up data or make calculations based on columns


Why use relational databases
----------------------------

* Data separate from analysis.
  * No risk of accidentally changing data when analyzing it
  * If we change the data we can just rerun the query
* Fast for large amounts of data
* Improve quality control of data entry (type constraints and use of forms in
  Access, Filemaker, etc.)
* The concepts of relational database querying are core to understanding how to
  do similar things in R and Python


Database Management Systems
---------------------------

There are a number of different database management systems for working with
relational data. We're going to use SQLite today, but basically everything we
teach you will apply to the other database systems as well (e.g., MySQL,
PostgreSQL, MS Access, Filemaker Pro). The only things that will differ are the
details of exactly how to import and export data and the
[details of data types](#datatypediffs).


Dataset Description
-------------------

The data we will be using is a time-series for a small mammal community in
southern Arizona. This is part of a project studying the effects of rodents and
ants on the plant community that has been running for almost 40 years.  The
rodents are sampled on a series of 24 plots, with different experimental
manipulations controlling which rodents are allowed to access which plots.

This is a real dataset that has been used in over 100 publications. We've
simplified it just a little bit for the workshop, but you can download the
[full dataset](http://esapubs.org/archive/ecol/E090/118/) and work with it using
exactly the same tools we'll learn about today.


Database Design
---------------

1. Every row-column combination contains a single *atomic* value, i.e., not
   containing parts we might want to work with separately.
2. One field per type of information
3. No redundant information
     * Split into separate tables with one table per class of information
	   * Needs an identifier in common between tables – shared column - to
       reconnect (foreign key).


Introduction to SQLite Manager
------------------------------

Let's all open the database we downloaded in SQLite Manager by clicking on the
open file icon.

You can see the tables in the database by looking at the left hand side of the
screen under Tables.

To see the contents of a table, click on that table and then click on the Browse
and search tab in the right hand section of the screen.

If we want to write a query, we click on the Execute SQL tab.

Import
------

1. Start a New Database **Database -> New Database**
2. Start the import **Database -> Import**
3. Select the file to import
4. Give the table a name (or use the default)
5. If the first row has column headings, check the appropriate box
6. Make sure the delimiter and quotation options are correct
7. Press **OK**
8. When asked if you want to modify the table, click **OK**
9. Set the data types for each field

***EXERCISE: Import the plots and species tables***

You can also use this same approach to append new data to an existing table.


Basic queries
-------------
Let's start by using the **surveys** table.
Here we have data on every individual that was captured at the site,
including when they were captured, what plot they were captured on,
their species ID, sex and weight in grams.

Let’s write an SQL query that selects only the year column from the surveys
table.

    SELECT year FROM surveys;

We have capitalized the words SELECT and FROM because they are SQL keywords.
SQL is case insensitive, but it helps for readability – good style.

If we want more information, we can just add a new column to the list of fields,
right after SELECT:

    SELECT year, month, day FROM surveys;

Or we can select all of the columns in a table using the wildcard *

    SELECT * FROM surveys;

### Unique values

If we want only the unique values so that we can quickly see what species have
been sampled we use ``DISTINCT``

    SELECT DISTINCT species FROM surveys;

If we select more than one column, then the distinct pairs of values are
returned

    SELECT DISTINCT year, species_id FROM surveys;

### Calculated values

We can also do calculations with the values in a query.
For example, if we wanted to look at the mass of each individual
on different dates, but we needed it in kg instead of g we would use

    SELECT year, month, day, weight/1000.0 from surveys;

When we run the query, the expression `weight / 1000.0` is evaluated for each row
and appended to that row, in a new column. Note that because weight is an integer, if we divide by the integer 1000, the results will be reported as integers. In order to get more significant digits, you need to include the decimal point so that SQL knows you want the results reported as floating point numbers. 

Expressions can use any fields, any
arithmetic operators (+ - * /) and a variety of built-in functions (). For
example, we could round the values to make them easier to read.

    SELECT plot, species_ID, sex, weight, ROUND(weight / 1000.0, 2) FROM surveys;

***EXERCISE: Write a query that returns
             The year, month, day, speciesID and weight in mg***

Filtering
---------

Databases can also filter data – selecting only the data meeting certain
criteria.  For example, let’s say we only want data for the species Dipodomys
merriami, which has a species code of DM.  We need to add a WHERE clause to our
query:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE species_id="DM";

We can do the same thing with numbers.
Here, we only want the data since 2000:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE year >= 2000;

We can use more sophisticated conditions by combining tests with AND and OR.
For example, suppose we want the data on Dipodomys merriami starting in the year
2000:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE (year >= 2000) AND (species_id = "DM");

Note that the parentheses aren’t needed, but again, they help with readability.
They also ensure that the computer combines AND and OR in the way that we
intend.

If we wanted to get data for any of the Dipodomys species,
which have species codes DM, DO, and DS we could combine the tests using OR:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE (species_id = "DM") OR (species_id = "DO") OR (species_id = "DS");

***EXERCISE: Write a query that returns
   the day, month, year, species ID, and weight (in kg) for
   individuals caught on Plot 1 that weigh more than 75 g***


Saving & Exporting queries
--------------------------

* Exporting:  **Actions** button and choosing **Save Result to File**.
* Save: **View** drop down and **Create View**


Building more complex queries
-----------------------------

Now, lets combine the above queries to get data for the 3 Dipodomys species from
the year 2000 on.  This time, let’s use IN as one way to make the query easier
to understand.  It is equivalent to saying `WHERE (species_id = "DM") OR (species_id
= "DO") OR (species_id = "DS")`, but reads more neatly:

    SELECT * FROM surveys WHERE (year >= 2000) AND (species_id IN ("DM", "DO", "DS"));

    SELECT *
    FROM surveys
    WHERE (year >= 2000) AND (species_id IN ("DM", "DO", "DS"));

We started with something simple, then added more clauses one by one, testing
their effects as we went along.  For complex queries, this is a good strategy,
to make sure you are getting what you want.  Sometimes it might help to take a
subset of the data that you can easily see in a temporary database to practice
your queries on before working on a larger or more complicated database.


Sorting
-------

We can also sort the results of our queries by using ORDER BY.
For simplicity, let’s go back to the species table and alphabetize it by taxa.

    SELECT * FROM species ORDER BY taxa ASC;

The keyword ASC tells us to order it in Ascending order.
We could alternately use DESC to get descending order.

    SELECT * FROM species ORDER BY taxa DESC;

ASC is the default.

We can also sort on several fields at once.
To truly be alphabetical, we might want to order by genus then species.

    SELECT * FROM species ORDER BY genus ASC, species ASC;

***Exercise: Write a query that returns
             year, species, and weight in kg from the surveys table, sorted with
             the largest weights at the top***


Order of execution
------------------

Another note for ordering. We don’t actually have to display a column to sort by
it.  For example, let’s say we want to order by the species ID, but we only want
to see genus and species.

    SELECT genus, species FROM species ORDER BY taxa ASC;

We can do this because sorting occurs earlier in the computational pipeline than
field selection.

The computer is basically doing this:

1. Filtering rows according to WHERE
2. Sorting results according to ORDER BY
3. Displaying requested columns or expressions.


Order of clauses
----------------
The order of the clauses when we write a query is dictated by SQL: SELECT, FROM, WHERE, ORDER BY
and we often write each of them on their own line for readability.


***Exercise: Let's try to combine what we've learned so far in a single query.
Using the surveys table write a query to display the three date
fields, species ID, and weight in kilograms (rounded to two decimal places), for
rodents captured in 1999, ordered alphabetically by the species ID.***



**BREAK**

Aggregation
-----------

Aggregation allows us to combine results by grouping records based on value and
calculating combined values in groups.

Let’s go to the surveys table and find out how many individuals there are.
Using the wildcard simply counts the number of records (rows)

    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM surveys;

We can also find out how much all of those individuals weigh.

    SELECT COUNT(*), SUM(weight) FROM surveys;

***Do you think you could output this value in kilograms, rounded to 3 decimal
   places?***

    SELECT ROUND(SUM(weight)/1000.0, 3) FROM surveys;

There are many other aggregate functions included in SQL including
MAX, MIN, and AVG.

***From the surveys table, can we use one query to output the total weight,
   average weight, and the min and max weights? How about the range of weight?***

Now, let's see how many individuals were counted in each species. We do this
using a GROUP BY clause

    SELECT species_id, COUNT(*)
    FROM surveys
    GROUP BY species_id;

GROUP BY tells SQL what field or fields we want to use to aggregate the data.
If we want to group by multiple fields, we give GROUP BY a comma separated list.

***EXERCISE: Write queries that return: 1. How many individuals were counted in
   each year. 2. Average weight of each species in each year***

We can order the results of our aggregation by a specific column, including the
aggregated column.  Let’s count the number of individuals of each species
captured, ordered by the count

    SELECT species_id, COUNT(*)
    FROM surveys
    GROUP BY species_id
    ORDER BY COUNT(species_id);


Joins
-----

To combine data from two tables we use the SQL JOIN command, which comes after
the FROM command.

We also need to tell the computer which columns provide the link between the two
tables using the word ON.  What we want is to join the data with the same
species codes.

    SELECT *
    FROM surveys
    JOIN species ON surveys.species_id = species.species_id;

ON is like WHERE, it filters things out according to a test condition.  We use
the table.colname format to tell the manager what column in which table we are
referring to.

We often won't want all of the fields from both tables, so anywhere we would
have used a field name in a non-join query, we can use *table.colname*

For example, what if we wanted information on when individuals of each
species were captured, but instead of their species ID we wanted their
actual species names.

    SELECT surveys.year, surveys.month, surveys.day, species.genus, species.species
    FROM surveys
    JOIN species ON surveys.species_id = species.species_id;

***Exercise: Write a query that returns the genus, the species, and the weight
   of every individual captured at the site***

Joins can be combined with sorting, filtering, and aggregation.  So, if we
wanted average mass of the individuals on each different type of treatment, we
could do something like

    SELECT plots.plot_type, AVG(surveys.wgt)
    FROM surveys
    JOIN plots
    ON surveys.plot = plots.plot_id
    GROUP BY plots.plot_type;


Adding data to existing tables
------------------------------

* Browse & Search -> Add
* Enter data into a csv file and append


Other database management systems
---------------------------------

* Access or Filemaker Pro
    * GUI
    * Forms w/QAQC
	* But not cross-platform
* MySQL/PostgreSQL
    * Multiple simultaneous users
	* More difficult to setup and maintain


Q & A on Database Design (review if time)
-----------------------------------------

1. Order doesn't matter
2. Every row-column combination contains a single *atomic* value, i.e., not
   containing parts we might want to work with separately.
3. One field per type of information
4. No redundant information
     * Split into separate tables with one table per class of information
	 * Needs an identifier in common between tables – shared column - to
       reconnect (foreign key).


<a name="datatypes"></a> Data types
-----------------------------------

| Data type  | Description |
| :------------- | :------------- |
| CHARACTER(n)  | Character string. Fixed-length n  |
| VARCHAR(n) or CHARACTER VARYING(n) |	Character string. Variable length. Maximum length n |
| BINARY(n) |	Binary string. Fixed-length n |
| BOOLEAN	| Stores TRUE or FALSE values |
| VARBINARY(n) or BINARY VARYING(n) |	Binary string. Variable length. Maximum length n |
| INTEGER(p) |	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| SMALLINT | 	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| INTEGER |	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| BIGINT |	Integer numerical (no decimal). |
| DECIMAL(p,s) |	Exact numerical, precision p, scale s. |
| NUMERIC(p,s) |	Exact numerical, precision p, scale s. (Same as DECIMAL) |
| FLOAT(p) |	Approximate numerical, mantissa precision p. A floating number in base 10 exponential notation. |
| REAL |	Approximate numerical |
| FLOAT |	Approximate numerical |
| DOUBLE PRECISION |	Approximate numerical |
| DATE |	Stores year, month, and day values |
| TIME |	Stores hour, minute, and second values |
| TIMESTAMP |	Stores year, month, day, hour, minute, and second values |
| INTERVAL |	Composed of a number of integer fields, representing a period of time, depending on the type of interval |
| ARRAY |	A set-length and ordered collection of elements |
| MULTISET | 	A variable-length and unordered collection of elements |
| XML |	Stores XML data |


<a name="datatypediffs"></a> SQL Data Type Quick Reference
----------------------------------------------------------

Different databases offer different choices for the data type definition.

The following table shows some of the common names of data types between the various database platforms:

| Data type |	Access |	SQLServer |	Oracle | MySQL | PostgreSQL |
| :------------- | :------------- | :---------------- | :----------------| :----------------| :---------------|
| boolean	| Yes/No |	Bit |	Byte |	N/A	| Boolean |
| integer	| Number (integer) | Int |	Number | Int / Integer	| Int / Integer |
| float	| Number (single)	|Float / Real |	Number |	Float |	Numeric
| currency | Currency |	Money |	N/A |	N/A	| Money |
| string (fixed) | N/A | Char |	Char | Char |	Char |
| string (variable)	| Text (<256) / Memo (65k+)	| Varchar |	Varchar / Varchar2 |	Varchar |	Varchar |
| binary object	OLE Object Memo	Binary (fixed up to 8K) | Varbinary (<8K) | Image (<2GB)	Long | Raw	Blob | Text	Binary | Varbinary |

##Resources
[SQL Cheat Sheet](http://amyehodge.github.io/Beginning_SQL/SQL_cheat_sheet.md)
